Austin Camp Mabry recorded temperatures of 105 or more for 10 days in a row, according to the National Weather Service, breaking the city's record set in 1923.

The National Weather Service Twitter account for the Austin and San Antonio areas announced the new record on Wednesday. Camp Mabry recorded 105 degrees at 2:33 p.m. on Wednesday, making it the 10th day of at least 105-degree temperatures.
National Weather Service meteorologist Andrew Quigley said the previous record for the longest streak of 105-degree or more days in Austin was set 100 years ago. The previous record's nine-day streak was recorded from Aug. 11, 1923, to Aug. 20, 1923.

"I would say the potential — no guarantee, but potential, certainly — (is) there to see this streak continue into this weekend and early next week," Quigley said.
He said the seven-day forecast shows that every day until Wednesday will be about 105 degrees or more. Wednesday is predicted to hit 104 degrees, but that value will likely change when the day gets closer, Quigley said.
The new streak began on July 7 at 105 degrees, according to the National Weather Service website. The hottest temperature of the 10 days was 108 degrees, which was reached on July 12 and on Monday. For the 10-day streak, the minimum temperatures ranged from 77 to 80 degrees.

The National Weather Service also announced on Wednesday that the current excessive heat warnings and heat advisories have been extended through Thursday until 8 p.m.
Alabama’s generally warm, humid climate results from its mid-latitude location and proximity to the Gulf of Mexico. This location also produces the often-turbulent weather patterns that regularly bring tornadoes and hurricanes to the state. Located within the Humid Subtropical region in the Koppen classification system, Alabama’s climate is characterized by relatively mild winters, hot summers, and year-round precipitation.
One of the most important factors in determining Alabama’s climate patterns is its mid-latitude location (the boundaries of the state extend from approximately 30° to 35° north latitude and 85° to 88.5° west longitude). This location, in conjunction with the Earth’s orbit around the Sun and its axial tilt of 23.5° relative to the Sun, produces variations in day length and temperature patterns throughout the year that result in an annual cycle of four distinct seasons. For example, day length for the city of Montgomery, Montgomery County, which is located near the geographic center of the state, varies from a minimum of approximately 10 hours in December to a maximum of approximately 14 hours in June. Montgomery’s average minimum daily temperature in January is approximately 35.8° F and its average maximum daily temperature in July is approximately 93° F. The highest temperature reported in the state appears to be 112° F at Centreville, Bibb County, on September 5, 1925, and the lowest appears to be -27° F at New Market, Madison County, on January 30, 1966.
Temperatures tend to be slightly higher in the southern half of the state than in the northern half, as can be seen in a comparison of temperature records for the cities of Mobile, Mobile County, and Huntsville, Madison County. Mobile, located in the south, has an average minimum daily temperature in January of approximately 39.9° F, whereas Huntsville, located in the north, has an average minimum daily temperature in January of approximately 29.3° F. Mobile has an average maximum daily temperature in July of approximately 91.2° F, whereas Huntsville has an average maximum daily temperature in July of approximately 86.5° F.
Precipitation patterns tend to be higher in the southern half of the state than in the northern half, with the Mobile area averaging up to 65.9 inches and the Huntsville area averaging 57.0 inches. In south Alabama, higher temperatures and precipitation patterns combine to produce a considerable difference in the length of the growing season for agricultural production across the state, which varies from approximately 200 days per year in the north to approximately 250 days per year in the South.

The variation in temperature and precipitation patterns from the north to the south is largely owing to the influence of the Gulf of Mexico, which is possibly the second-most important factor in determining Alabama’s climate patterns. In addition to serving as a source of moisture, this large body of warm water stores energy absorbed from the Sun throughout the year, which helps moderate temperature patterns along the coast. This influence on local temperature patterns is commonly known as the Maritime Effect.
In summer, a large mass of warm, moist air, known as a maritime tropical air mass, moves northward from the Gulf of Mexico and dominates daily weather patterns in Alabama. In autumn, the polar jet stream begins to migrate southward and directs cool, dry air masses, known as Continental Polar air masses, into the state. The leading edge of the continental polar air mass is referred to as a cold front, and these fronts move across Alabama at a rate of about one per week until spring, when the polar jet stream begins to migrate northward. When a cold front moves across Alabama, the cold, dry air forces the warm, moist air of the Maritime Tropical air mass upward into the atmosphere. The moisture in the warm air soon condenses and returns to the surface as precipitation. As the cold front passes overhead, the cold, dry air mass moves into the region and dominates daily weather patterns for several days. Cold, sunny weather usually prevails until the next cold front moves into the region. The precipitation that normally occurs when the cold front passes is usually in the form of intense rainfall; however, it occasionally occurs as snowfall. Snowfall is more common in the northern region of the state than in the south, but snow is still a relatively rare phenomenon in Alabama. The highest recorded amount of snowfall during a 24-hour period appears to be 13 inches on March 12-13, 1993, at Birmingham.
Tornadoes are one of the deadliest weather hazards in Alabama. They are commonly associated with the passage of cold fronts because the interaction of the cold, dry air mass and the warm, moist air mass produces an area of unstable weather conditions along the cold front that are ideal for tornado formation. This area of unstable atmospheric conditions is known as the Squall Line. Alabama averages approximately 20 tornadoes per year. The most common months for tornado formation in the state are March, April, and November, but they occur throughout the year. Alabama is unusual in that it has both a spring and an autumn tornado season. Tornadoes can occur at any time of the day, but they are most common between 10 a.m. and 8 p.m., with the peak time at approximately 5 p.m. The two most common areas for tornado activity in Alabama are the north-central region around Birmingham and the southwest region around Mobile. Tornado activity in the Mobile area is partially related to hurricanes making landfall along the coast, as hurricanes are commonly known to produce tornadoes as they come ashore.

The worst overall tornado disaster in the state was the Dixie Tornado Outbreak of April 27, 2011. The event, according to preliminary data, produced 268 tornadoes throughout the United States on a single day and set the record for most lives claimed in a single day, at 314. More than 50 tornadoes were reported in north and central Alabama, claiming 238 lives. The highest number of deaths occurred in Tuscaloosa County (39), DeKalb County (33), and Franklin County (27). Initial surveys indicate that eight of these tornadoes were rated EF4 and two were rated EF5 on the Enhanced Fujita Scale (a 2007 updated version of the classic Fujita Scale of tornado intensity). Two of the worst individual tornado disasters in the state occurred on the same day as part of the famous Super Tornado Outbreak of April 3 and 4, 1974, which produced 148 tornadoes and affected 13 states across the South and Midwest. On the evening of April 3, two F5 tornadoes on the Fujita Scale hit Tanner approximately 30 minutes apart and left 55 dead. Later that same evening, another F5 tornado hit Guin and left 23 dead. Other notable tornado disasters in Alabama include the Birmingham tornado of April 15, 1956 (25 deaths); the Huntsville tornado of November 15, 1989 (21 deaths); the Palm Sunday tornado that destroyed the Goshen United Methodist Church in Cherokee County on March 27, 1994 (20 deaths); and the Oak Grove tornado of April 8, 1998, (32 deaths).

Hurricanes are arguably the most important weather hazard in the state in terms of economic damage. Hurricanes are members of a category of meteorological events known as tropical cyclones. More specifically, a tropical cyclone with a sustained wind speed of 39–73 mph is classified as a “tropical storm” and a tropical cyclone with a sustained wind speed of 74 mph or greater is classified as a “hurricane.” The tropical cyclone season in Alabama extends from May to October, with September being the peak month. Tropical cyclones hit Alabama at an average rate of approximately once every 1.5 years. Hurricanes (i.e., storms with sustained wind speeds of 74 mph or greater) hit Alabama approximately once every 7.5 years. Fortunately, most of the tropical cyclones (tropical storms and hurricanes) that hit Alabama actually make landfall in another state, which helps reduce the amount of damage reported in the state. The average rate at which hurricanes actually make landfall along the Alabama coast is relatively low, at approximately once every 16 years. When hurricanes hit the Alabama coast, the amount of damage they cause is usually catastrophic.
Two of the most infamous hurricanes to make landfall along the Alabama coast were Frederic in 1979 and Ivan in 2004. Hurricane Frederic was a category 4 on the Saffir-Simpson scale when it crossed Dauphin Island on the evening of September 12, 1979. The official wind speed at the time of landfall was estimated to be 132 mph, but an unofficial wind speed of approximately 145 mph was reported on the bridge that crosses over to the island. The total cost of the damage in Alabama was estimated at $1.4 billion. Hurricane Ivan was a category 3 on the Saffir-Simpson scale when it made landfall at Gulf Shores, Baldwin County, on the evening of September 15, 2004. The official wind speed at landfall was estimated to be approximately 120 mph. The total cost of the damage in Alabama was estimated at $3 billion.

Alabama’s relatively mild climate is a major factor in two of the state’s most important economic activities: agriculture and tourism. For example, the Gulf Coast is an attractive destination during the winter months for vacationers fleeing harsh conditions in the northern United States. The pleasant experience of a warm, mild winter convinces many of these people to make Alabama their permanent home upon retirement.
Well, if you are like me, the existance of a Climate Clock was a surprise.

In New York City, there is a Climate Clock, which was put up in 2020, and numerous major cities around the world have followed suit. If you are interested, you can join the Society and get a Climate Clock for your town.

The Climate Clock is scientifically calibrated to document the increase in Earth's temperature and, based on those and historic temperature figures, it calculates the time we have left to stop climate change. It is pegged to relate the time Earth will reached atmospheric temperatures of no return. In other words, how long will it be until the Earth's temperature increase another 1.5 degrees?

The Climate Clock measures the amount of time remaining for us to make a significant contribution to holding the increase in atmospheric temperature to below the 1.5 degree threshold. When the Earth's temperature increases above that mark, it will trigger climate changes, which will be extremely hard to reverse.

The Climate Clock has recently been reset to under five years, and if we reach that increase in temperature, worldwide heat waves, swamped coastal cities and horrible hurricanes and tornados will be magnified. If that occurs, it will be because we did almost nothing keep it from happening.
Yes, I'm depressed, and if you aren't, you should be! My depression is one of those lingering depressions that is just going to keep hanging on. It seems I'm reminded daily of the "I don't give a damn" climate change attitude that seems to prevail almost everywhere I go.

Vertis and I stopped at a restaurant for lunch a few days back, and as we were seated, the waitress put down our plastic utensils wrapped in a paper napkin complete with a straw, and our iced tea came in Styrofoam. Yes, I know that's an everyday transaction, which occur multi-millions of times a day, and that thought really depresses me, because it seems as if we are like a bunch of lemmings heading for a cliff, and nothing we are doing is going to change our direction... except a disaster.

Yes! I am completely convinced civilization is about to fall off a cliff, because we are ignoring climate change 's horrible outcomes, which had been a possibility and are now a strong probability, and that probability is rapidly becoming a certainty.

Right now, the heat index in many of the Persian Gulf countries is near the upper threshold of which humans can endure.

The horrible climate scenario is that is rapidly becoming an absolute disaster is hanging over our planet like a cloud of doom, and we are totally ignoring the consequences. It seems to me that we're just waiting for the other shoe to drop, and as we go on our way, it reminds me of a person with a terminal case of lung cancer lighting another cigarette. Unless you are living under a rock, the climate change facts that are coming out of newsrooms over the past month or so are potentially devastating and they should alarm you. But obviously they haven't.
Let's consider a few of the more alarming facts.

(1) In a few years, if climate change continues, it will result in the loss of two-thirds of the beaches in the world. That's right, and it's because the two global polar regions are warming three times faster than the rest of the Earth, and the ice contained on the poles is melting at a catastrophic rate. Glaciers in Switzerland are melting so fast that the Swiss are covering them to keep the sun from melting them. Of course, the towns in the low lying areas on our Gulf Coast will be a sad example in a few years as we say goodbye to towns such as Texas City and Grand Isle.

(2) The soaring temperatures in the crop growing areas of the world are creating drought conditions worldwide, similar to the Dust Bowl of the Great Depression, and global crop losses will cause shortages of staple agricultural products to be impacted, and starving people from places such as Africa and Central America will come in droves of desperate people to temperate-climate countries such as the USA and those in Europe. If you think things on our southern boarders are bad today with migrants trying to enter the USA, multiply that by 10 times and know that is what America and Europe are facing.

(3) Or consider the worldwide food shortages because of the droughts and floods, which are becoming more frequent, along with the oceans becoming so hot (the surface of the Gulf of Mexico is registering 90-plus degrees right now). Fisheries will dry up and droughts will reduce arable land to the point where a loaf of bread could cost $25 and shrimp and fish will become so expensive you wouldn't even think of buying them.
(4) The heat waves that were always just minor irritants are becoming more and more common, but not just in the areas where they usually occur, and they are more intense. They are a worldwide scenario now, and they increase the chances of out-of-control wildfires followed by floods, which will make thousand-year climate events commonplace. The impact that heat waves will have on the world's food supply will send multi-millions of desperately starving people searching just for something to eat.

(5) But what is really dangerous during this time of a gradual warming of our atmosphere are the frequent climate spikes caused by global warming. In other words, what we are seeing is a gradual warming that is reflected in the record temperatures set around the world, but the reaction of weather systems are spikes of excesses. Yes, you have a gradual increase in temperatures, which is causing droughts and other temperature-related consequences, but the greatest dangers to our civilization come in super-charged waves, which caused, a couple of weeks back, a normal July rainstorm in South Arkansas to dump 13 inches of rain overnight, and in Vermont, four to six inches of rain fell in a couple of hours causing a flash flood, which caused billions of dollars in damages.

Yes, those are facts, and yet we just go on our merry way whistling and doing nothing!

We, as average, intelligent Americans, should be ashamed of our inaction! When I see the Styrofoam, the straws and other trash that sends multi-millions of pounds of carbon into our atmosphere, I see us If you really want to get depressed, drive to your local public high school, and if it anything like El Dorado High School, you will see a packed parking lot with hundreds of cars and no trees or sidewalks or bicycle racks.

That should depress you... But does it?being part of the Titanic's band playing away as the good ship Earth sinks.
Death certificates don’t always reflect the role that extreme heat played in ending a person’s life even when it seems obvious it was a factor.
Postal worker Eugene Gates Jr. was delivering mail in the suffocating Dallas heat this summer when he collapsed in a homeowner's yard and was taken to a hospital, where he died.

Carla Gates said she's sure heat was a factor in her 66-year-old husband's death, even though she's still waiting for the autopsy report. When Eugene Gates died on June 20, the temperature was 98 degrees Fahrenheit (36.6 Celsius) and the heat index, which also considers humidity, had soared over 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43.3 Celsius).

“I will believe this until the day I die, that it was heat-related," Carla Gates said.

Even when it seems obvious that extreme heat was a factor, death certificates don't always reflect the role it played. Experts say a mishmash of ways more than 3,000 counties calculate heat deaths means we don't really know how many people die in the U.S. each year because of high temperatures in an ever warming world.
That imprecision harms efforts to better protect people from extreme heat because officials who set policies and fund programs can't get the financial and other support needed to make a difference.
“Essentially, all heat related deaths are preventable. People don’t need to die from the heat," said epidemiologist Kristie L. Ebi, who focuses on global warming’s impact on human health as a professor at the University of Washington.

With a better count, she said, “you can start developing much better heat wave early warning systems and target people who are at higher risk and make sure that they’re aware of these risks.”

Currently, about the only consistency in counting heat deaths in the U.S. is that officials and climate specialists acknowledge fatalities are grossly undercounted.

"Deaths are investigated in vastly different ways based on where a person died,” said Dr. Greg Hess, the medical examiner for Pima County, Arizona's second most populous county and home to Tucson. “It should be no surprise that we don't have good nationwide data on heat-related deaths.”

Many experts say a standard decades-old method known as counting excess deaths could better show how extreme heat harms people.
“You want to look at the number of people who would not have died during that time period and get a true sense of the magnitude of the impact,” Ebi said, including people who would not have suffered a fatal heart attack or renal failure without the heat.

The excess deaths calculation is often used to estimate the death toll in natural disasters, with researchers tallying fatalities that exceeded those that occurred at the same time the previous year when circumstances were average.

Counting excess deaths was used to calculate the human impact of a heat wave in Chicago that killed more than 700 people in July 1995, many elderly Black people who lived alone. Researchers also counted excess deaths during the COVID-19 pandemic to provide more complete information about deaths directly and indirectly related to the coronavirus.

But as things stand now, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports just 600 to 700 heat deaths annually in the United States. A study published last month in the journal Nature Medicine estimated more than 61,000 heat-related deaths last summer across Europe, which has roughly double the U.S. population but more than 100 times as many heat deaths.
Dr. Sameed Khatana, a staff cardiologist at the Philadelphia VA Medical Center and assistant professor at the University of Pennsylvania’s Perelman School of Medicine, has said deaths in which heat contributed significantly to fatalities from causes like heart failure should also be considered.

Khatana participated in research published last year that counted excess deaths in all U.S. counties. The findings suggested that from 2008 to 2017 between 3,000 to 20,000 adult deaths from all causes listed on death certificates were linked to extreme heat. Heart disease was listed as the cause of about half of the deaths.

After the Pacific Northwest heat wave in summer of 2021, the Canadian province of British Columbia reported more than 600 deaths due to heat exposure while Oregon and Washington each initially reported a little more than 100 such fatalities.
“It’s frustrating that for 90 years public health officials in the United States have not had a good picture of heat-related mortality because we have such a bad data system,” said Dr. David Jones, a Harvard Medical School professor who also teaches in the epidemiology department at the Harvard T.H. Chan School of Public Health.

There is no uniformity among who does the counting across U.S. jurisdictions. Death investigations in some places might be carried out by a medical examiner, typically a physician trained in forensic pathology. In other locales, the coroner could be an elected sheriff, such as the one in Orange County, California. In some small counties in Texas, a justice of peace might determine cause of death.

Utah and Massachusetts are among states that do not track heat-related deaths where exposure to extreme heat was a secondary factor.

The CDC, which is often several years behind in reporting, draws information on heat deaths from death certificate information included in local, state, tribal and territorial databases.
The CDC said in a statement that coroners and others who fill out death certificates “are encouraged to report all causes of death,” but they may not always associate those contributing causes to an extreme heat exposure death and include the diagnostic codes for heat illnesses.

Hess, the Arizona coroner, said determining environmental heat was a factor in someone's death is difficult and can take weeks or even months of investigation including toxicological tests.

“If someone was shot in the head, it's pretty obvious what happened there," Hess said. “But when you find a body in a hot apartment 48 hours after they died, there is a lot of ambiguity.”
Hess noted that Pima County this year began including heat-related deaths in its tally of environmental heat fatalities. Maricopa County, home to Phoenix, America's hottest big city, for years has included heat-related deaths. Clark County, Nevada, home to Las Vegas, now also considers deaths in which heat was a contributing factor.

Maricopa's Public Health Department counted 425 “heat associated” deaths last year, including those where heat was a secondary factor, such as a heart attack provoked by high temperatures.

It reports there were 59 heat-associated deaths confirmed this year through Aug. 5, with another 345 under investigation. The latest count follows the hottest month in Phoenix on record, and a record 31 consecutive days that hit 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43.3 Celsius) or higher.

Dallas, which regularly sees summer highs over 100 degrees Fahrenheit (37.7 Celsius), sweltered through an excessive heat warning this month and also grapples with oppressive humidity.

Carla Gates, whose mail carrier husband died, noted cities worldwide now must learn to deal with extreme weather. She said her spouse, with 36 years on the job, tried to protect himself by taking a chest filled with ice and several bottles of cold water on his rounds.

“Our climate has changed,” she said. “And I don’t think it’s going back to how it was 20 years ago. So we’re going to have to get used to it and we’re going to have to make some adjustments.”

Now she wants to honor her husband by pushing legislation to ensure people working outside are better protected from the heat. Gates noted that the day her husband died he was in an old mail truck without working air conditioning.

“I don’t wish this on anyone, anyone to get a phone call that their loved one died working, doing something that they love in the heat,” she said.