Extreme weather is upending the way we experience the season. Last week I got an email that I was dreading.
“Good afternoon parents,” began the message from Camp Combe in Putnam Valley, New York. “It is with a heavy heart that we have made the difficult decision to cancel the 2023 camp season. Due to the recent severe storms, the camp has sustained extensive damage.”
Nine days earlier, a slow moving weather system dumped torrential amounts on the East coast, causing extensive flooding from Philadelphia to Vermont. Now the day camp that my two children had attended for the past four years — leaving them reliably exhausted and happy — was done for the year.
Cynthia Delfino, the chief executive of the YMCA of Central North Westchester, said that what remains of Camp Combe is now an odorous, mucky mess. “We’ve never, ever, ever had something like this,” she told me. “But this is the new normal we need to prepare for.”
For people around the world, summer has long been something to look forward to — a sometimes lazy, sometimes frenetic, hopefully sunny few months when the days get longer and time itself seems to stretch out. In many countries, children get a respite from the school year. Families embark on road trips, camping expeditions
and beach sojourns.
And while summer is by no means canceled, there’s no getting around the fact that extreme heat, flash floods and poor air quality — all of which are made worse by climate change — are now upending the way that billions of people around the globe experience the season.
Traditions transformed
Summer camps have been disrupted from New England to Greece, where 1,200 children had to be evacuated from a summer camp as flames approached. A camp in Sardinia limited beach access to the early morning and canceled outdoor sports.
Climate change is also altering leisure time in India. For centuries, the monsoon season that began around June “ushered in a particular joie de vivre,” my colleague Suhasini Raj wrote. She remembers that “summer used to be a time of abandon — of ice creams and holidays in the mountains.”
But India’s rainy season has recently become more violent and unpredictable. Dozens of people died amid unusually heavy downpours that pummeled the northern part of the country and caused widespread damage earlier this month.
The British government is warning vacationers about extreme temperatures in Spain, Italy and Greece. Major tourist sites, including the Acropolis in Athens, have closed because of heat. And in Florida, jumping in the ocean is no longer a reliable way to cool off when ocean surface temperatures are hitting 101 degrees Fahrenheit (38 Celsius). In Australia, summers have become overshadowed by fears of extreme heat and out-of-control wildfires, like the ones that devastated much of the country in January 2020. “I love summer, it’s my favorite season. I like to be warm,” said Ellie Cooper, a therapist in Adelaide. “But loving summer makes me feel guilty and scared because of the threat of bushfires.”
It’s not hard to imagine a future where summer no longer conjures up innocent visions of ice cream, sunbathing and swimming. This July is on track to be Earth’s warmest month on record, the European Union climate monitor said on Thursday. And future years look to be even hotter, as humankind’s emissions of heat-trapping gases are compounded by the recurring climate pattern known as El Niño, which is just getting started.
Remaking summer
Humans always find ways to adapt, and already, people are finding ways to navigate new seasonal extremes.
My colleague Elda Cantú, who recently wrote about blistering heat in northern Mexico, said that in the northern state of Nuevo León, the governor had announced a public campaign for people to donate air-conditioning units to schools.
Trackers, a summer camp in Oregon, has taken over an old Marshalls department store in downtown Portland and converted it into an indoor facility for archery, axe-throwing and rock climbing, The Atlantic reports.
In Canada, summer camps equip children on canoe trips with N-95 masks in case wildfire smoke gets thick, Global News reported. Cabins are equipped with air-conditioners, and campers stay inside to avoid the sun during the heat of the day. During an unprecedented wildfire season, counselors are making “pretend fires out of cardboard painted red and orange. And they’re sitting around that giant fire, still singing songs.”
Even in cities where heat is nothing new, extreme temperatures are forcing people to adjust. In Rio de Janeiro, Rita Fernandes, the president of a leading carnival association, remembers seeing people fall sick in one street party as noon approached earlier this year.
“It was unbearable,” she said. “The ground was boiling, heat was rising from the asphalt.”
But Fernandes said the party will go on. Some carnival festivities already start as early as 7 a.m., and may soon start even earlier. “Maybe people can all jump in the sea with their costumes on,” she said. “But the party won’t end.” A planet-saving diet
The latest study from World Weather Attribution scientists predicts that extreme heat waves will return more frequently. Some of the extreme temperatures recorded in the Southwestern United States, southern Europe and northern Mexico at the beginning of the month would have been “virtually impossible” without the influence of human-caused climate change, according to research made public Tuesday.
During the first half of July hundreds of millions of people in North America, Europe and Asia sweltered under intense heat waves. A heat wave in China was made 50 times as likely by climate change, the researchers said.
World Weather Attribution, an international group of scientists who measure how much climate change influences extreme weather events, focused on the worst heat so far during the northern hemisphere summer. In the United States, temperatures in Phoenix have reached 110 degrees Fahrenheit, roughly 43 Celsius, or higher for more than 20 days in a row. Many places in southern Europe are experiencing record-breaking, triple-digit temperatures. A remote township in Xinjiang, China, hit 126 degrees, breaking the national record.
“Without climate change, we wouldn’t see this at all,” said Friederike Otto, a senior lecturer in climate science at Imperial College London and co-founder of World Weather Attribution. “Or it would be so rare that it basically would not be happening.” But in a climate changed by fossil fuel emissions, heat waves of this magnitude “are not rare events,” she said. The Far-Reaching Effects of Extreme Heat
On the Trail: In a summer of deadly heat for hikers, rangers at Grand Canyon National Park use a pioneering approach of aggressive messaging and outreach to prevent disaster on the trails.
Phoenix’s July in Hell: An entire month of temperatures reaching or exceeding 110 degrees has ground down people’s health and patience in the Arizona city of 1.6 million.
Lost Productivity: From meatpackers to home health aides, U.S. workers are struggling in sweltering temperatures. Productivity is taking a hit.
A ‘Dangerous Combination’: Trying to keep cool during a record-setting summer is a social divide for residents of low-income Latino neighborhoods along the Texas border, where running water can be in short supply.
Before the industrial revolution, the North American and European heat waves were virtually impossible, according to the researchers’ statistical analysis. China’s heat wave would only have happened about once every 250 years.
If the composition of the atmosphere remained at today’s levels, the United States and Mexico could expect heat waves like the one this July about once every 15 years. In southern Europe, there would be a 1 in 10 chance each year of a similar event. In China there’s a 1 in 5 chance each year of a reoccurrence.
But because humans are continuing to burn fossil fuels and put extra greenhouse gases into the atmosphere, the odds will continue to tip in extreme heat’s favor: even if we stop, temperatures will not cool again, they will just stop rising.
“The heat waves we are seeing now, we definitely need to live with,” Dr. Otto said.
As temperatures have climbed in Europe, Greece has faced a rash of wildfires that have forced the largest evacuations in the country’s history. The blistering heat has made firefighting efforts more challenging, officials said. More frequent and more intense wildfires in the Mediterranean can also be linked to climate change, according to a recent study.
“We have rising risks from heat,” said Julie Arrighi, director of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Climate Centre and one of the researchers with World Weather Attribution. “It is deadly.” She emphasized the need to adapt cities and critical infrastructure to extreme heat, but also to reduce greenhouse gas emissions at the same time.
Many local and national governments, especially in Europe, have created heat action plans that include things like public cooling centers, and advance warning and coordination between social services and hospitals.
But even where these programs exist they are imperfect, and for now, the human cost of extreme temperatures remains high. The death toll from this month’s heat won’t be clear for some time, but more than 100 people have already died this summer in Mexico of heat-related causes, according to the national health secretary. Last summer, approximately 61,000 people died across Europe because of heat waves, according to another recent study.
World Weather Attribution’s heat wave study was not peer-reviewed, but the findings are based on standardized methods published in 2020. The group uses more than a dozen climate models to compare observed temperatures from the real world with modeled projections of the planet without human-caused climate change.
“This methodology is very standard in the field,” said Andrew Pershing, vice president for science at the nonprofit group Climate Central. He was not involved in the Tuesday study but has collaborated with World Weather Attribution in the past.
The sheer heat much of the planet is currently experiencing is “shocking” in a historical context, Dr. Pershing said, but added that the findings of climate change’s role are “not surprising.”
The first two weeks of July were probably Earth’s hottest on human record, according to an analysis by the European Union’s Copernicus Climate Change Service. The National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration forecasts more unusually hot temperatures across most of the United States in August.
A dispatch from Phoenix. “Like being on the edge of death if you go for a walk.”
That’s how my colleague Jack Healy described living in Phoenix, where it has reached 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43 degrees Celsius) or higher for 13 consecutive days, with no end in sight.
Jack moved to Phoenix in 2021, chasing stories about the fast-growing American West. And this week, he filed a remarkable article about the withering heat wave currently scorching the Southwest.
He wrote: “Summers in Phoenix are now a brutal endurance match. As the climate warms, forecasters say that dangerous levels of heat crank up earlier in the year, last longer — often well past Halloween — and lock America’s hottest big city in a sweltering straitjacket.
“In triple-digit heat, monkey bars singe children’s hands, water bottles warp and seatbelts feel like hot irons. Devoted runners strap on headlamps to go jogging at 4 a.m., when it is still only 90 degrees, come home drenched in sweat and promptly roll down the sun shutters. Neighborhoods feel like ghost towns at midday, with rumbling rooftop air-conditioners offering the only sign of life.”
Jack talked to a mail carrier named Rachelle Williams, who moved to Phoenix to escape Midwestern winters. No matter how much water she drinks or sun protection she wears, her legs tingle and head spins as she covers her route.
“I don’t even know how I do it,” she said. A community volunteer, who distributes water and ice to people in need, said the heat feels like “walking around in a blow-dryer.”
Jack knows he’s lucky. He has a job that allows him to spend time in air-conditioning. Nevertheless, he’s had to develop his own coping strategies for living in an open-air furnace.
He starts drinking water the moment he wakes up, “to saturate your system.” He wears long sleeves and pants “to guard against the sun and the reflected heat from the pavement.” He freezes water bottles and takes them everywhere, “drinking them down as they slowly melt.” And he always has electrolytes on hand to replace the salts that he sweats out.
One key part of living in Phoenix, Jack told me, is “learning to accept and live with being extraordinarily sweaty all the time.”
An over-baked world
The experience of Jack and his fellow Phoenicians is increasingly common. California is bracing for a heat wave with triple-digit temperatures. Heat advisories are in effect from the Central Plains to South Florida this week. In Texas, 10 residents of Laredo died from heat-related illnesses between June 15 and July 3.
“People are used to being without air conditioning, surviving without air conditioning,” the city’s medical examiner told my colleague David Goodman. “But it was just too hot, and we lost a lot of people because of it.”
Around the globe, temperatures are soaring as the world enters a multiyear period of intense warming, fueled by man-made climate change and a naturally occurring El Niño weather pattern, which is releasing a gusher of heat into the atmosphere.
This week, temperatures are approaching 110 degrees Fahrenheit in Seville, Spain; Riyadh, Saudi Arabia; and Marrakesh, Morocco. In places like Kuwait City and Basra, Iraq, it’s not uncommon for the heat index (a combination of air temperature and humidity) to reach 125 degrees in the morning, The Times reported last year.
And just last week, my colleagues in Mexico had a story about what it’s like to live in one of that country’s hottest cities, Hermosillo, where a 120-degree day is not uncommon.
But the risks of heat extend well beyond those cities that regularly rank as the hottest in the world. As Somini Sengupta wrote in this newsletter in April, “extreme heat can be deceptively dangerous, even in places accustomed to extreme heat.”
“It’s not just Texas and Southern California and Florida. That’s not the full picture,” said Dr. Kai Chen, a professor at the Yale School of Public Health who studies the health risks from climate change. “People are vulnerable everywhere.”
Dr. Chen and his colleagues recently unveiled an interactive map of the U.S. that shows how vulnerable different parts of the country are to extreme heat.
Their research revealed that people in Costilla County, Colo.; Marion County, Ind.; and Essex County, Mass., are also at high risk from boiling temperatures as heat waves affect more and more of the country.
Dr. Chen and his team considered factors such as income and education level, as well as how much green space neighborhoods have and whether people live alone.
Unfortunately and unsurprisingly, their research showed that in wealthier neighborhoods — where people are more likely to have air-conditioning and do less work outdoors — the risks from extreme heat were less severe. In neighborhoods with lower incomes and fewer trees, the risks skyrocketed.
“What we found is that for people who have low socioeconomic status, especially minorities, the health risks of heat are much higher,” Dr. Chen said.
Whether you’re in Phoenix, Baghdad or New York, it’s important to know how to stay cool, stay hydrated and watch for signs of heat stress and heat stroke. All of that and more is explained in this helpful guide to dealing with a heat wave.
The whitest paint ever is in the Guinness Book of World Records, but that’s not its greatest achievement.
The paint, created by scientists at Purdue University, cools down buildings by bouncing 98 percent of the sun’s rays away from the Earth’s surface, up through the atmosphere and into deep space.
It doesn’t look all that different from regular white paint from the hardware store, which absorbs significant heat from the sun. By comparison, the Purdue paint cools surfaces to below-ambient temperatures — by up to eight degrees Fahrenheit during the day, and 19 degrees at night. That could reduce air-conditioning usage and help power grids struggling to cope with heat waves, as the paint doesn’t need any energy to work.
Using the ultra-reflective paint, which is at least a year from being ready for commercial use, could help offset the urban heat island effect. But there are limits to this type of cooling. We still need to stop sending greenhouse gasses into the atmosphere to avoid more catastrophic warming, according to Jeremy Munday, a clean technology expert.
“This is definitely not a long-term solution to the climate problem,” he told my colleague Cara Buckley. “This is something you can do short term to mitigate worse problems while trying to get everything under control.”

July’s global average temperature of 16.95 degrees Celsius was a third of a degree Celsius (six-tenths of a degree Fahrenheit) higher than the previous record set in 2019
Now that July's sizzling numbers are all in, the European climate monitoring organization made it official: July 2023 was Earth's hottest month on record by a wide margin.
July's global average temperature of 16.95 degrees Celsius (62.51 degrees Fahrenheit) was a third of a degree Celsius (six tenths of a degree Fahrenheit) higher than the previous record set in 2019, Copernicus Climate Change Service, a division of the European Union's space program, announced Tuesday. Normally global temperature records are broken by hundredths or a tenth of a degree, so this margin is unusual.
“These records have dire consequences for both people and the planet exposed to ever more frequent and intense extreme events," said Copernicus deputy director Samantha Burgess. There have been deadly heat waves in the Southwestern United States and Mexico, Europe and Asia.
Scientific quick studies put the blame on human-caused climate change from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas.
Days in July have been hotter than previously recorded from July 2 on. It's been so extra warm that Copernicus and the World Meteorological Organization made the unusual early announcement that it was likely the hottest month days before it ended. Tuesday's calculations made it official.
The month was 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) warmer than pre-industrial times. In 2015, the nations of the world agreed to try to prevent long-term warming — not individual months or even years, but decades — that is 1.5 degrees warmer than pre-industrial times.
Last month was so hot, it was .7 degrees Celsius (1.3 degrees Fahrenheit) hotter than the average July from 1991 to 2020, Copernicus said. The worlds oceans were half a degree Celsius (0.9 degrees Fahrenheit) warmer than the previous 30 years and the North Atlantic was 1.05 degrees Celsius (1.9 degrees Fahrenheit) hotter than average. Antarctica set record lows for sea ice, 15% below average for this time of year.
Copernicus’ records go back to 1940. That temperature would be hotter than any month the U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration has recorded and their records go back to 1850. But scientists say it’s actually the hottest in a far longer time period.
“It's a stunning record and makes it quite clearly the warmest month on Earth in ten thousand years,” said Stefan Rahmstorf, a climate scientist at the Potsdam Institute for Climate Research in Germany. He wasn't part of the Copernicus team.
Rahmstorf cited studies that use tree rings and other proxies that show present times are the warmest since the beginning of the Holocene Epoch, about 10,000 years ago. And before the Holocene started there was an ice age, so it would be logical to even say this is the warmest record for 120,000 years, he said.
“We should not care about July because it's a record, but because it won't be a record for long,” said Imperial College of London climate scientist Friederike Otto. “It's an indicator of how much we have changed the climate. We are living in a very different world, one that our societies are not adapted to live in very well.”


