Large parts of the Northwest from Oregon to British Columbia are bracing for unusually high temperatures this weekend. Some areas could see daily averages up to 30 degrees above normal, which could pose health problems to people who have not had a chance to build tolerance to heat so early into the warm season.

Temperatures in Seattle are forecast to climb close to 90 degrees on Sunday. Historic data shows only six years since 1948 have had May temperatures reach this level, and they have never occurred this early in the month. In Portland, readings are expected to top 90 degrees on several days. Vancouver, B.C., could see its earliest 80-degree day on record.

Meteorologists and heat experts are warning that “subtle” early season heat waves can cause hospital admissions as they catch people when their bodies are least used to heat.
“Typically, unseasonably warm weather early in the ‘heat season’ can be particularly challenging to human health because the population is less acclimatized versus later in the summer,” said Zac Schlader, an associate professor at Indiana University-Bloomington who researches the effect of heat stress on the human body. “If these same conditions were experienced later in the year, they are unlikely to have as large of an effect on human health,” he added.

Acclimatization to increased temperatures requires at least two hours of exposure to heat for a period of four to 14 days. Schlader said acclimatization has two components: the body becomes better at responding to heat, and people adapt their behavior, for example by drinking more water.

Outdoor workers are especially at risk during an early heat wave when temperatures first begin to increase in the spring or early summer. The Labor Department’s Occupational Safety and Health Administration recommends shorter shifts and more frequent breaks. This allows workers to gradually gain tolerance to the increased heat.
Early heat events “are where we tend to see a lot of either emergency department visits or hospitalizations due to heat illness,” according to Kimberly McMahon, public weather program manager at the National Weather Service.

“Being early in the warm season and relatively mild, these events may fly under the radar of the public,” said Kevin Lanza, an assistant professor at UTHealth Houston School of Public Health. He warned that areas characterized by “urban heat islands” — neighborhoods with few trees and an abundance of heat-trapping pavement — would see higher temperatures.

McMahon said the population groups most vulnerable to extreme heat include the elderly, small children, outdoor workers and pregnant women. People who don’t have air conditioning in their homes or can’t afford to run it are also at risk.

As of 2021, 53 percent of homes in Seattle were air-conditioned — the second-lowest share, after San Francisco, among the 25 largest U.S. metro areas. In southern cities like Atlanta, Houston, and New Orleans, more than 99 percent of homes have some form of air conditioning.

According to the nonprofit research group Climate Central, the expected heat wave in the Northwest was made two to five times more likely by global warming. Director Andrew Pershing said the group is working to detect the “fingerprint” of climate change in an area while or even before a heat wave is unfolding, “because that’s when people will be able to make that connection that this event is made worse because of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. These are the events that we have to anticipate and prepare for.”
As temperatures hit 119 degrees in Phoenix last week, doctors at Valley wise Health Medical Center saw a patient whose internal temperature was at least 110 — the maximum registered by its thermometers.

Needing to cool the patient down as quickly as possible, the emergency medical team turned to a technique they had designed and honed themselves: immersing the person in a body bag filled with ice. It worked. In less than half an hour, the patient’s temperature was down to about 102, low enough to move on to further treatment and observation. The next day, the medical team had to pull out a new body bag.

All over the world, this July has been record-setting hot — the result of an intensifying El Niño in the Pacific Ocean layered on top of a worsening climate change. The impacts are especially severe in Phoenix, ground zero for extreme heat in the U.S. The city has experienced 25 consecutive days with temperatures of at least 110, a record. At night, temperatures have hovered in the 90s.

“Even for us locals, it’s just too hot,” says Geoff Comp, an emergency doctor at Valley wise and a Phoenix native. The heat’s impact is “scary,” he says. “People are getting really, really sick.”

In July, the two Valley wise hospitals in Phoenix have treated patients for heat illness on a daily basis, Comp says. In Maricopa County, which includes Phoenix, officials have confirmed 18 heat-related deaths this year and are investigating 69 more.
“This is a problem every summer for us,” says Nick Staab, medical epidemiologist at the Maricopa County Department of Health. “Over the last couple of years, we’re just seen a consistent increase in the number of heat-related deaths. In 2022, we saw 425 deaths, and that was a 25% increase over 2021.”

For years, the Valleywise emergency medical team treated patients suffering from heat illness using what’s known as “evaporative cooling.” That could mean spraying a patient with water while a fan blows on them, for example. “It works but it’s not really efficient,” Comp says.
The hospital’s staff and students wanted to find a better way — and felt they needed to, given Phoenix’s propensity for extreme heat and the vulnerability of some parts of its population. Many of those who come into the hospital with heat stroke are also suffering from substance abuse.
In 2020, Comp says a resident at Valleywise suggested treating heat illness by immersing patients in ice. Although uncommon in hospital settings, the practice is ubiquitous in professional sports. The following year, the medical team, including Comp, started experimenting with body bags full of ice.
Comp declined to share data on the efficacy of the ice-bag technique, citing its newness, but says the Valleywise team has found it to be a “great way to treat this local emergency that we have.” The ice-filled bags can bring down core temperature in less than an hour, he says, and often in less than 30 minutes.

What Comp hopes people take away from the body-bag method is not how easy it is to cool down quickly, but how easy it is to be laid low by dangerously high temperatures. “My recommendation and my hope is people recognize that it’s very easy to get caught in the heat,” he says. “The overall message is stay hydrated, know your limits and try to keep cool as best you can.”
July will be remembered as the hottest month on record in Phoenix as well as across much of the world. 

I ask you, what do we value? 

What do we want our personal and collective legacy to be? 

Do we want to be remembered as the generation that destroyed life on earth — the last generation to be able to enjoy the beauty and abundance that nature has to offer? 

This is the magnitude of the decisions we are making today. The clock is ticking.
Everywhere we look we see the impacts of the previous decisions that have allowed the atmospheric carbon dioxide levels to reach 424 parts per million. 

“We are absolutely at levels unseen in human civilization,” said Jason Furtado, a University of Oklahoma meteorology professor. “Humans are running a massive experiment on the Earth climate system via burning carbon, and the results are turning out not great for a lot of people on this planet.”
As a great-grandmom, I am very concerned about what life on earth will look like for our children and grandchildren. 

Will humanity survive? What about plants, animals, insects, birds, amphibians? 

We must act now while we still have time.
The fingerprints of climate change are all over the intense heat waves gripping the globe this month, a new study finds. Researchers say the deadly hot spells in the American Southwest and Southern Europe could not have happened without the continuing buildup of warming gases in the air.

These unusually strong heat waves are becoming more common, Tuesday’s study said. The same research found the increase in heat-trapping gases, largely from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas has made another heat wave — the one in China — 50 times more likely with the potential to occur every five years or so.

A stagnant atmosphere, warmed by carbon dioxide and other gases, also made the European heat wave 4.5 degrees Fahrenheit (2.5 degrees Celsius) hotter, the one in the United States and Mexico 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit (2 degrees Celsius) warmer and the one in China one 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit (1 degree Celsius) toastier, the study found.
Several climate scientists, using tree rings and other stand-ins for temperature records, say this month’s heat is likely the hottestEarth has been in about 120,000 years, easily the hottest of human civilization.

“Had there been no climate change, such an event would almost never have occurred,” said study lead author Mariam Zachariah, a climate scientist at Imperial College of London. She called heat waves in Europe and North America “virtually impossible” without the increase in heat from the mid 1800s. Statistically, the one in China could have happened without global warming.
Since the advent of industrial-scale burning, the world has warmed 2.2 degrees Fahrenheit (1.2 degrees Celsius), so “they are not rare in today’s climate and the role of climate change is absolutely overwhelming,” said Imperial College climate scientist Friederike Otto, who leads the team of volunteer international scientists at World Weather Attribution who do these studies.

The particularly intense heat waves that Texas, California, Arizona, New Mexico, Nevada, Baja California, Sonora, Chihuahua and Coahuila are now roasting through are likely to happen about once every 15 years in the current climate, the study said.

But the climate is not stabilized, even at this level. If it warms a few more tenths of a degree, this month’s heat will become even more common, Otto said. Phoenix has had a record-shattering 25 straight days of temperatures at or above 110 degrees Fahrenheit (43.3 degrees Celsius) and more than a week when the nighttime temperature never dropped below 90 degrees Fahrenheit (32.2 Celsius)

The heat in Spain, Italy, Greece and some Balkan states is likely to reoccur every decade in the current climate, the study said.

Because the weather attribution researchers started their analysis of three simultaneous heat waves on July 17, the results are not yet peer reviewed, which is the gold standard for science. But it used scientifically valid techniques, the team’s research regularly gets published and several outside experts told The Associated Press it makes sense.
The way scientists do these rapid analyses is by comparing observations of current weather in the three regions to repeated computer simulations of “a world that might have been without climate change,” said study co-author Izidine Pinto, a climate scientist at the Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute.

In Europe and North America, the study doesn’t claim human-caused climate change is the sole cause of the heat waves, but it is a necessary ingredient because natural causes and random chance couldn’t produce this alone.

Texas state climatologist John Nielsen-Gammon said the study was reasonable, but looks at a broad area of the U.S. Southwest, so it may not be applicable to every single place in the area.

“In the United States, it’s clear that the entire southern tier is going to see the worst of the ever-worsening heat and this summer should be considered a serious wake-up call,” said University of Michigan environment dean Jonathan Overpeck.

With heat waves, “the most important thing is that they kill people and they particularly kill and hurt and destroy lives and livelihoods of those most vulnerable,” Otto said.
Deadly with extreme weather now, climate change is about to get so much worse. It is likely going to make the world sicker, hungrier, poorer, gloomier and way more dangerous in the next 18 years with an “unavoidable” increase in risks, a new United Nations science report says.

And after that watch out.

The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report said Monday that if human-caused global warming isn’t limited to just another couple tenths of a degree, an Earth now struck regularly by deadly heat, fires, floods and drought in future decades will degrade in 127 ways, with some being “potentially irreversible.”
“The cumulative scientific evidence is unequivocal: Climate change is a threat to human well-being and planetary health,” says the major report designed to guide world leaders in their efforts to curb climate change. Delaying cuts in heat-trapping carbon emissions and waiting on adapting to warming’s impacts, it warns, “will miss a brief and rapidly closing window of opportunity to secure a liveable and sustainable future for all.”

Today’s children who may still be alive in the year 2100 are going to experience four times more climate extremes than they do now even with only a few more tenths of a degree of warming over today’s heat. But if temperatures increase nearly 2 more degrees Celsius from now (3.4 degrees Fahrenheit) they would feel five times the floods, storms, drought and heat waves, according to the collection of scientists at the IPCC.

Already at least 3.3 billion people’s daily lives “are highly vulnerable to climate change” and 15 times more likely to die from extreme weather, the report says. Large numbers of people are being displaced by worsening weather extremes. And the world’s poor are being hit by far the hardest, it says.

More people are going to die each year from heat waves, diseases, extreme weather, air pollution and starvation because of global warming, the report says. Just how many people die depends on how much heat-trapping gas from the burning of coal, oil and natural gas gets spewed into the air and how the world adapts to an ever-hotter world, scientists say.
“Climate change is killing people,” said co-author Helen Adams of King’s College London. “Yes, things are bad, but actually the future depends on us, not the climate.”

With every tenth of a degree of warming, many more people die from heat stress, heart and lung problems from heat and air pollution, infectious diseases, illnesses from mosquitoes and starvation, the authors say.

The report lists mounting dangers to people, plants, animals, ecosystems and economies, with people at risk in the millions and billions and potential damages in the trillions of dollars. The report highlights people being displaced from homes, places becoming uninhabitable, the number of species dwindling, coral disappearing, ice shrinking and rising and increasingly oxygen-depleted and acidic oceans.

Some of these risks can still be prevented or lessened with prompt action.

“Today’s IPCC report is an atlas of human suffering and a damning indictment of failed climate leadership,” United Nations Secretary-General Antonio Guterres said in a statement. “With fact upon fact, this report reveals how people and the planet are getting clobbered by climate change.”
The panel of more than 200 scientists puts out a series of these massive reports every five to seven years, with this one, the second of the series, devoted to how climate change affects people and the planet. Last August the science panel published a report on the latest climate science and projections for future warming, branded “code red” by the United Nations.

Climate scientist Katharine Hayhoe of The Nature Conservancy, who wasn’t part of the latest report, calls it the “Your House is on Fire” report.

“There’s real existential threats,” report co-chair Debra Roberts of South Africa told The Associated Press.

Since the last version of this impacts panel’s report in 2014, “all the risks are coming at us faster than we thought before,” said report co-author Maarten van Aalst, a climate scientist for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies, mentioning floods, droughts and storms. “More of it will get really bad much sooner than we thought before.”

“Every bit of warming matters. The longer you wait... the more you will pay later,” said report co-chair Hans-Otto Poertner of Germany told the AP in an interview.
Since 2008, weather disasters have forced about 20 million people a year out of their homes as climate change refugees, with the future looking even grimmer in some places, according to the report.

By 2050, a billion people will face coastal flooding risk from rising seas, the report says. More people will be forced out of their homes from weather disasters, especially flooding, sea level rise and tropical cyclones.

“Some regions that are presently densely populated will become unsafe or uninhabitable,” the report says. And it says that small islands face that “overarching significant risk” of no longer being livable.

And eventually in some places it will become too hot for people to work outdoor, which will be a problem for raising crops, said report co-author Rachel Bezner Kerr of Cornell University.

Some of these climate change harms have been warned about for years, even decades, and have become reality, now written in the past and present tenses. Others are still warnings about future woes fast approaching.
Monday’s 36-page summary, condensed from more than 1,000 pages of analysis, was written by scientists and then edited line-by-line by governments and scientists with that final summary approved by consensus Saturday during a two-week virtual conference that occurred while Russia invaded Ukraine. In the final hours, a Ukrainian delegate made an impassioned plea that the war not overshadow the climate change report, some authors said.

“Climate change isn’t lurking around the corner waiting to pounce. It’s already upon us raining down blows on billions of people,” United Nations Environment Programme Director Inger Andersen said.

Study authors said much of Africa, parts of Central and South America, small islands and South Asia are “hot spots” for the worst harm to people and ecosystems.

The report has a new emphasis on the mental health toll climate change has taken, both on people displaced or harmed by extreme weather and on people’s anxiety level, especially youths worried about their futures.
If the world warms just another nine-tenths of a degree Celsius from now (1.6 degrees Fahrenheit), the amount of land burned by wildfires globally will increase by 35%, the report says.

And the rest of the living world won’t be spared either, with the report warning of climate change extinctions. Already two species — the mammal Bramble Cays melomys in Australia and Central America’s golden toad — have gone extinct because of climate change.

“The risk of extinction in biodiversity hotspots increases by about tenfold as warming rises from 1.5 to 3 degrees Celsius,” said Poertner, the German co-chair.

With just one more degree Celsius of warming (1.8 degrees Fahrenheit), 20% of the world’s species will become endangered, representing “severe biodiversity risk,” the report says.

One of the biggest changes in the report from previous versions emphasizes how crucial a key temperature threshold is scientifically and for people and how exceeding it, even if only a few decades, can cause permanent damage.

In the 2015 Paris agreement, the world adopted a goal of limiting warming to 1.5 degrees Celsius (2.7 degrees Fahrenheit) since pre-industrial times, which was then further cemented when a special IPCC report in 2018 showed massive harms beyond that 1.5 degree mark. This new report found that threshold is even more important, but scientists do note that the world does not fall off a cliff after that mark.
Because the world is already 1.1 degrees (2 degrees Fahrenheit) warmer than pre-industrial time and emissions are still rising, not falling, the vast majority of future scenarios show temperatures are on track to shoot well above 1.5 degrees, hitting the mark in the 2030s. So some officials began to count on going over that threshold and coming back down a decade or so later with still-to-be-proven expensive technology to suck carbon out of the air or by some other means.

Monday’s report says that if that overshoot happens, “then many human and natural systems will face additional severe risks... some will be irreversible, even if global warming is reduced.”

Countries need to do more to adapt to warming, with rich countries needing to do a better job giving financial help to poorer nations to adjust to climate change caused mostly by the developing world, the report says. But there are limits to what adapting can accomplish and sometimes — like in the case of sea walls — technical fixes to lessen harms in one place will make it worse somewhere else, the report says.

“This has to be a whole of society response. Not a single individual, community, city or government can opt out,” South African co-chair Roberts said in a Monday press conference. “While action is happening, it’s not rapid enough and it’s uneven.”
Amid all the danger signs, experts said they want to shy away from doom.

“Fear is not a good advisor and never is,” German vice chancellor and minister for climate and economy Robert Habeck told the AP. “Hope is the right one.”

Hayhoe said what’s needed is realism, action and hope.

“It’s really bad and there’s a good chance that it will get worse,” Hayhoe said. “But if we do everything we can, that will make a difference. Our actions will make the difference... That’s what hope is.”